applications: serial_lte_modem: document the Zephyr modem compatibility (#14288)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: applications/serial_lte_modem/doc/nRF91_as_Zephyr_modem.rst

.. _slm_as_zephyr_modem:

nRF91 Series as a Zephyr-compatible modem
#########################################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Overview
********

Starting with |NCS| v2.6.0, the Serial LTE Modem (SLM) application can be used to turn an nRF91 Series SiP into a standalone modem that can be used through Zephyr's cellular modem driver.
This means that the controlling chip can run a Zephyr application that seamlessly uses Zephyr's IP stack instead of offloaded sockets via AT commands.

> This is made possible by SLM's support of CMUX and PPP and Zephyr's cellular modem driver.

Reviewer: Can you rewrite this section.
From 2.6.0 the Serial LTE Modem supports PPP and CMUX (standard?).

This means that it can be used through Zephyr's cellular modem driver.

Or something like that.. There are other users than Zephyr, so we should first mention that we are supporting PPP+CMUX and only after that, mention that we are compatible with Zephyr.

The :ref:`nRF52840 SoC present in the nRF9160 DK <zephyr:nrf9160dk_nrf52840>` can even be made to be the controlling chip with the appropriate configuration (described below).
This is only possible on the nRF9160 DK, not on the other nRF91 Series DKs.

.. note::

   As of |NCS| v2.6, Zephyr's GNSS driver does not support the nRF91 Series running SLM.
   This functionality is part of planned future work.

Configuration
*************

Both SLM and the Zephyr application running on the controlling chip must be compiled with the appropriate configuration to make them work together.

For that, Kconfig fragments and devicetree overlays must be added to the compilation command.

See the :ref:`slm_config_files` section for a description of some of the mentioned Kconfig fragments.

nRF91 Series SiP running SLM
============================

The following configuration files must be included:

* :file:`overlay-cmux.conf` - To enable CMUX.
* :file:`overlay-ppp.conf` - To enable PPP.

> * :file:`overlay-zephyr-modem.conf` - To tailor SLM to how Zephyr's cellular modem driver works.

Reviewer 2: Missing from: https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/applications/serial_lte_modem/doc/slm_description.html#configuration-files

  This enables the :ref:`CONFIG_SLM_START_SLEEP <CONFIG_SLM_START_SLEEP>` Kconfig option, which makes the nRF91 Series SiP start only when the :ref:`power pin <CONFIG_SLM_POWER_PIN>` is toggled.

In addition, if the controlling chip is an external MCU, the following files must also be included:

> * :file:`overlay-zephyr-modem-external-mcu.conf`- To define the power pin.

Reviewer 2: Missing from: https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/applications/serial_lte_modem/doc/slm_description.html#configuration-files

  Make sure to update the defined pin so that it matches your setup.

> * :file:`overlay-external-mcu.overlay` - To configure the UART to be used.

Reviewer 2: Missing from: https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/applications/serial_lte_modem/doc/slm_description.html#configuration-files

  Make sure to update its configuration (pins, baud rate) so that it matches your setup.
  To update the configuration of the UART, you can directly modify the ``uart2`` node in the :file:`*_ns.overlay` overlay file matching your board in the :file:`boards` directory.

Or, if the controlling chip is the nRF52840 of the nRF9160 DK, the following files must also be included:

> * :file:`overlay-zephyr-modem-nrf9160dk-nrf52840.conf` - To define the power pin.

Reviewer 2: Missing from: https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/applications/serial_lte_modem/doc/slm_description.html#configuration-files

> * :file:`overlay-zephyr-modem-nrf9160dk-nrf52840.overlay` - To configure the UART to be routed between the nRF9160 and the nRF52840 of the DK.

Reviewer 2: Missing from: https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/applications/serial_lte_modem/doc/slm_description.html#configuration-files

Author: To answer all those `Missing from`, it was actually intended.
I thought that it doesn't make much sense to describe them there, and rather have them only here, in context, in the only place to which they are relevant: this page.
What do you think?

Reviewer 2: I think that they should be at least mentioned in there. And linked to this page. So that the reader of that page understands the meaning of the overlays.

Reviewer 3: Agreed they should be listed and linked to this for more details. Didn't notice they weren't listed there.

Controlling chip running Zephyr
===============================

> You should use the configuration of Zephyr's :zephyr:code-sample:`cellular-modem` sample as a starting point.

Author: I am not sure what you mean here.
What are you referring to with `the overlays that we have in here`? Those in SLM? None of them must be used to compile the controlling chip's application. It only uses Zephyr stuff, nothing from NCS.

> You should use the configuration of Zephyr's :zephyr:code-sample:`cellular-modem` sample as a starting point.

Reviewer 2: I mean the overlays in line 66, and 77 in the nrf9160dk case.

Looking at the https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/samples/net/cellular_modem/README.html, left it unclear to me, what else (if anything) should be inserted after those overlays.

> You should use the configuration of Zephyr's :zephyr:code-sample:`cellular-modem` sample as a starting point.

Author: Nothing else. Also, the sample's Readme is not meant to be used as a reference. I rephrased a bit the section's introduction; let me know if there should be more clarifications.

Specifically, the Kconfig options found in the following files:

* :file:`prj.conf` - This file enables various Zephyr APIs, most of which are needed for proper functioning of the application.
* :file:`boards/nrf9160dk_nrf52840.conf` - This file tailors the configuration of the modem subsystem and driver to the SLM.

In addition, depending on what the controlling chip is, you can use the following devicetree overlay files as a basis.
They define the modem along with its UART and power pin.

If the controlling chip is an external MCU:

* :file:`boards/nrf9160dk_nrf9160_ns.overlay` - The UART configuration and power pin can be customized according to your setup.

If the controlling chip is the nRF52840 of the nRF9160 DK:

* :file:`boards/nrf9160dk_nrf52840.overlay` - The UART and power pin are configured to be routed to the nRF9160.

Developing the Zephyr application
*********************************

To get started developing the Zephyr application running on the controlling chip, look at the code of Zephyr's :zephyr:code-sample:`cellular-modem` sample to see how the modem is managed and used.
You can even compile, flash and run the sample to verify proper operation of the modem.

> Flashing and running

Reviewer 2: I think that the above is highly necessary. I could not get this to work with 9160dk, and I am unsure what has gone wrong.

> Flashing and running

Reviewer 2: Also necessary would be instructions on how to see what is going on. Which uart to attach at which point. Which device should be selected in 9160dk for that to happen etc.

> Flashing and running

Reviewer 2: Excellent work!

********************

When built with the configuration instructed above, SLM will put the nRF91 Series SiP to deep sleep when powered on.
Zephyr's cellular modem driver running on the controlling chip will take care of waking up the nRF91 Series SiP, so it is advised to flash first SLM to the nRF91 Series SiP.

However, before flashing the SLM built with the instructed configuration, make sure that the nRF91 Series modem has been set to the desired system mode.
This is achieved by issuing an ``AT%XSYSTEMMODE`` command followed by an ``AT+CFUN=0`` command so that the modem saves the system mode to NVM.
This is needed because the modem's system mode is not automatically set at any point, so the one already configured will be used.

Additionally, if the controlling chip is an external MCU:

* Make sure that the UART and the power pin are wired according to how they are configured in both the external MCU and the nRF91 Series SiP.

Or if the controlling chip is the nRF52840 of the nRF9160 DK:

> * Make sure that the PROG/DEBUG switch on the DK is set to NRF91 when flashing SLM and to NRF52 when flashing the Zephyr application.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Make sure that the **PROG/DEBUG SW10** switch on the DK is set to **NRF91** when flashing SLM, and to **NRF52** when flashing the Zephyr application.
```

> .. _slm_as_zephyr_modem:

Reviewer 2: I think that it would be a good idea to link this page from the CMUX AT-command. To kind of tie it that this is the scenario where you would usually use CMUX.

Author: It is a good idea. Although everything is made to be usable independently, the features shouldn't bee too hidden from each other either.
(And actually another scenario I think is possible is to use CMUX and PPP but through something else than Zephyr's cellular modem driver. CMUX and PPP is the kind of typical functionality present in modems.)

However, before flashing the SLM built with the Zephyr-compatible modem configuration, make sure that the nRF91 Series modem has been set to the desired system mode.
Do this by issuing an ``AT%XSYSTEMMODE`` command followed by an ``AT+CFUN=0`` command so that the modem saves the system mode to NVM.
For example, to enable only LTE-M, issue the following command: ``AT%XSYSTEMMODE=0,1,0,0``
You need to do this because the modem's system mode is not automatically set at any point, so the one already configured will be used.

Additionally, if the controlling chip is an external MCU:

* Make sure that the UART and the power pin are wired according to how they are configured in both the external MCU and the nRF91 Series SiP.

Or if the controlling chip is the nRF52840 of the nRF9160 DK:

* Make sure that the **PROG/DEBUG SW10** switch on the DK is set to **NRF91** when flashing SLM, and to **NRF52** when flashing the Zephyr application.
  The switch also affects which chip is reset when the Reset button is pressed.
* No wiring is needed as the routing between the pins happens internally.

> When the Zephyr application has been flashed to the controlling chip and starts up, things will go as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the Zephyr application starts up after it has been flashed to the controlling chip, the following happens:
```

> * If it has power management enabled (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PM_DEVICE` is equal to ``y``), when it powers on the modem (by calling ``pm_device_action_run(<dev>, PM_DEVICE_ACTION_RESUME)`` as the sample does) the cellular modem driver will start by toggling the modem's power pin to wake it up.
> * Otherwise, if power management is disabled (in which case SLM should have :ref:`CONFIG_SLM_START_SLEEP <CONFIG_SLM_START_SLEEP>` set to ``n`` and :ref:`CONFIG_SLM_POWER_PIN <CONFIG_SLM_POWER_PIN>` can be left undefined), the cellular modem driver will automatically proceed and expect the modem to already be started.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* If power management is enabled (the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PM_DEVICE` Kconfig option is set to ``y``): when the application powers on the modem (by calling ``pm_device_action_run(<dev>, PM_DEVICE_ACTION_RESUME)`` as the sample does), the cellular modem driver will toggle the modem's power pin to wake it up.

  If power management is not enabled, then the :ref:`CONFIG_SLM_START_SLEEP <CONFIG_SLM_START_SLEEP>` Kconfig option should be set to ``n`` and :ref:`CONFIG_SLM_POWER_PIN <CONFIG_SLM_POWER_PIN>` can be left undefined.
  In this case, the cellular modem driver will automatically proceed and expect the modem to already be started.

```

* The cellular modem driver will start sending AT commands to SLM.
  It will enable the network status notifications, gather some information from the modem, enable CMUX, and set the modem to normal mode (with an ``AT+CFUN=1`` command).
  This will result in SLM' PPP starting automatically when the network registration is complete.

> * From this point onwards, assuming that the Zephyr application brought up the driver's network interface (as the sample does), it will be able to send and receive IP traffic through it.

Reviewer 2: Add something like this: "You can observe the operation by connecting to the uart on the controlling chip. With 9160dk, this is /dev/ttyACM1, by default. When you are connected, reset the controlling chip and observe the traces.".

> * From this point onwards, assuming that the Zephyr application brought up the driver's network interface (as the sample does), it will be able to send and receive IP traffic through it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* From this point onwards, if the Zephyr application brought up the driver's network interface, it will be able to send and receive IP traffic through it.
  The :zephyr:code-sample:`cellular-modem` sample does this.
```

.. _slm_as_zephyr_modem:

nRF91 Series as a Zephyr-compatible modem
#########################################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Overview
********

Starting with |NCS| v2.6.0, the Serial LTE Modem (SLM) application can be used to turn an nRF91 Series SiP into a standalone modem that can be used through Zephyr's cellular modem driver.
This means that the controlling chip can run a Zephyr application that seamlessly uses Zephyr's IP stack instead of offloaded sockets via AT commands.

This is made possible by SLM's support of CMUX and PPP and Zephyr's cellular modem driver.

The :ref:`nRF52840 SoC present in the nRF9160 DK <zephyr:nrf9160dk_nrf52840>` can even be made to be the controlling chip with the appropriate configuration (described below).
This is only possible on the nRF9160 DK, not on the other nRF91 Series DKs.

.. note::

>    As of |NCS| v2.6, Zephyr's GNSS driver does not support the nRF91 Series running SLM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   As of |NCS| v2.6.0, Zephyr's GNSS driver does not support the nRF91 Series running SLM.
```

Author: I put 2.6 and not 2.6.0 to clearly indicate that there is no chance any such change would come in a minor release (e.g. 2.6.1).

In addition, if the controlling chip is an external MCU, the following files must also be included:

* :file:`overlay-zephyr-modem-external-mcu.conf`- To define the power pin.
  Make sure to update the defined pin so that it matches your setup.
* :file:`overlay-external-mcu.overlay` - To configure which UART SLM will use.
  The actual configuration of the UART is defined in the :file:`*_ns.overlay` overlay file matching your board in the :file:`boards` directory.
  Make sure to update the UART configuration (pins, baud rate) so that it matches your setup.
  You can do this by modifying the properties of the node of the UART to be used, by editing either :file:`overlay-external-mcu.overlay` or the overlay file matching your board in the :file:`boards` directory.

Or, if the controlling chip is the nRF52840 of the nRF9160 DK, the following files must also be included:

* :file:`overlay-zephyr-modem-nrf9160dk-nrf52840.conf` - To define the power pin.
* :file:`overlay-zephyr-modem-nrf9160dk-nrf52840.overlay` - To configure the UART to be routed between the nRF9160 and the nRF52840 of the DK.

> Finally, if you want more verbose logging that includes the AT commands and responses, you can enable debug logging by uncommenting ``CONFIG_SLM_LOG_LEVEL_DBG=y`` in :file:`prj.conf`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, if you want more verbose logging that includes the AT commands and responses, you can enable debug logging by uncommenting ``CONFIG_SLM_LOG_LEVEL_DBG=y`` in the :file:`prj.conf` configuration file.
```

Controlling chip running Zephyr
===============================

Configuration files found in Zephyr's :zephyr:code-sample:`cellular-modem` sample are a good starting point.

Specifically, regardless of what the controlling chip is, the Kconfig options found in the following files:

* :file:`prj.conf` - This file enables various Zephyr APIs, most of which are needed for proper functioning of the application.
* :file:`boards/nrf9160dk_nrf52840.conf` - This file tailors the configuration of the modem subsystem and driver to the SLM.
  It makes the application's logs be output on UART 0 and also enables the debug logs of the cellular modem driver.
  If you do not want the debug logs output by the driver, you may turn them off by removing ``CONFIG_MODEM_LOG_LEVEL_DBG=y``.

> In addition, depending on what the controlling chip is, the following devicetree overlay files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition, depending on what the controlling chip is, the following devicetree overlay files are needed.
```

They define the modem along with the UART it is connected to and its power pin.

If the controlling chip is an external MCU:

* :file:`boards/nrf9160dk_nrf9160_ns.overlay` - The UART configuration and power pin can be customized according to your setup.

If the controlling chip is the nRF52840 of the nRF9160 DK:

* :file:`boards/nrf9160dk_nrf52840.overlay` - The UART and power pin are configured to be routed to the nRF9160.

Developing the Zephyr application
*********************************

> To get started developing the Zephyr application running on the controlling chip, look at the code of Zephyr's :zephyr:code-sample:`cellular-modem` sample to see how the modem is managed and used.

Author: It is an introduction to writing the application's code, not to the sample in particular, even though it happens to be the starting point here also.
`Controlling chip running Zephyr` is a sub-section of `Configuration`, which is at the same level than `Developing the Zephyr application`.

You can even compile, flash and run the sample to verify proper operation of the modem.

Flashing and running
********************

When built with the Zephyr-compatible modem configuration, SLM will put the nRF91 Series SiP to deep sleep when powered on.
Zephyr's cellular modem driver running on the controlling chip will take care of waking up the nRF91 Series SiP, so it is advised to first flash SLM to the nRF91 Series SiP.

However, before flashing the SLM built with the Zephyr-compatible modem configuration, make sure that the nRF91 Series modem has been set to the desired system mode.

> Do this by issuing an ``AT%XSYSTEMMODE`` command followed by an ``AT+CFUN=0`` command so that the modem saves the system mode to NVM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Do this by issuing an ``AT%XSYSTEMMODE`` command followed by an ``AT+CFUN=0`` command so that the modem saves the system mode to NVM.
You will need a regular SLM running in nrRF91 SiP, to run AT-commands.
```

For example, to enable only LTE-M, issue the following command: ``AT%XSYSTEMMODE=0,1,0,0``
You need to do this because the modem's system mode is not automatically set at any point, so the one already configured will be used.

Additionally, if the controlling chip is an external MCU:

* Make sure that the UART and the power pin are wired according to how they are configured in both the external MCU and the nRF91 Series SiP.

Or if the controlling chip is the nRF52840 of the nRF9160 DK:

* Make sure that the **PROG/DEBUG SW10** switch on the DK is set to **NRF91** when flashing SLM, and to **NRF52** when flashing the Zephyr application.
  The switch also affects which chip is reset when the Reset button is pressed.
* No wiring is needed as the routing between the pins happens internally.

To observe the operation sequence, you can view the application logs coming from both chips.
By default, SLM will output its logs through RTT, and the Zephyr application running on the controlling chip through its UART 0.

> The RTT logs can be seen with an RTT client such as ``JLinkRTTViewer``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The RTT logs can be seen with an RTT client such as ``JLinkRTTViewer``. If the controlling chip is the nRF52840 of the nRF9160 DK, the **PROG/DEBUG SW10** switch on the DK needs to be set to **NRF91**.
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The RTT logs can be seen with an RTT client such as ``JLinkRTTViewer``.
If the controlling chip is the nRF52840 of the nRF9160 DK, the **PROG/DEBUG SW10** switch on the DK needs to be set to **NRF91**.
```

After both applications have been flashed to their respective chips and you are connected to receive logs, you can reset the controlling chip.
When the Zephyr application starts up, the following happens:

* If power management is enabled (the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PM_DEVICE` Kconfig option is set to ``y``): when the application powers on the modem (by calling ``pm_device_action_run(<dev>, PM_DEVICE_ACTION_RESUME)`` as the sample does), the cellular modem driver will toggle the modem's power pin to wake it up.

  If power management is not enabled, the cellular modem driver will automatically proceed and expect SLM to already be started and in a pristine state.
  In this case, SLM should be compiled with the :ref:`CONFIG_SLM_START_SLEEP <CONFIG_SLM_START_SLEEP>` Kconfig option set to ``n``, and :ref:`CONFIG_SLM_POWER_PIN <CONFIG_SLM_POWER_PIN>` can be left undefined.

* The cellular modem driver will start sending AT commands to SLM.
  It will enable the network status notifications, gather some information from the modem, enable CMUX, and set the modem to normal mode (with an ``AT+CFUN=1`` command).

>   This will result in SLM' PPP starting automatically when the network registration is complete.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This will result in SLM's PPP starting automatically when the network registration is complete.
```

Author: :open_mouth:

.. _slm_as_zephyr_modem:

nRF91 Series as a Zephyr-compatible modem
#########################################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Overview
********

Starting with |NCS| v2.6.0, the Serial LTE Modem (SLM) application can be used to turn an nRF91 Series SiP into a standalone modem that can be used through Zephyr's generic modem driver.
This means that the controlling chip can run a Zephyr application that seamlessly uses Zephyr's IP stack instead of offloaded sockets via AT commands.

This is made possible by SLM's support of CMUX and PPP and Zephyr's generic modem driver.

> The :ref:`nRF52840 SoC present in the nRF9160 DK <zephyr:nrf9160dk_nrf52840>` can even be made to be the controlling chip with the appropriate configuration (described below).

Reviewer 2: Should this mention that other nrf91 products do not support this?

Author: I'm actually still surprised about this. Tried to look at the documentation of the nRF9161 DK but it was pretty sparse (compared to that of the nRF9160 DK).

  To update the configuration of the UART, you can directly modify the ``uart2`` node in the :file:`*_ns.overlay` file matching your board in the :file:`boards` directory.

Or if the controlling chip is the nRF52840 of the nRF9160 DK:

* :file:`overlay-zephyr-modem-nrf9160dk-nrf52840.conf` - To define the power pin.
* :file:`overlay-zephyr-modem-nrf9160dk-nrf52840.overlay` - To configure the UART to be routed between the nRF9160 and the nRF52840 of the DK.

For the controlling chip running Zephyr
=======================================

It is advised to use the configuration of Zephyr's :ref:`zephyr:cellular_modem` sample as a starting point.

Specifically, the Kconfig options found in the following files:

* :file:`prj.conf` - This file enables various Zephyr APIs, most of which are needed for proper functioning of the application.
* :file:`boards/nrf9160dk_nrf52840.conf` - This file tailors the configuration of the modem subsystem and driver to the SLM.

In addition, depending on what the controlling chip is, you can use the following Devicetree overlay file as a basis.
It defines the modem along with its UART and power pin.

> If the controlling chip is an external MCU:

Reviewer 2: Should this mention something about wiring the uarts together?

Author: Could, yeah.
